content/Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie.md, before:

---
title: Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie
date: 2024-03-17
tags:
  - author
  - english
  - literature
---
- **Bio**:
    - **Birth Date**: September 15, 1977
    - **Birthplace**: Enugu, Nigeria
    - **Background**: ]the fifth of six children, grew up in Nsukka, **Nigeria**. She was an avid reader from a young age and was profoundly influenced by[[ Chinua Achebe]]’s iconic novel, _[[Things Fall Apart]]_.
    - **Education**:
        - Studied medicine and pharmacy at the University of Nigeria.
        - Pursued communication and political science at Eastern Connecticut State University (B.A., 2001) in the United States.
        - Earned a master’s degree in creative writing from Johns Hopkins University.
        - Studied African history at Yale University.
- **Notable Works**:
    - **Purple Hibiscus** (2003): Her debut novel set in Nigeria, it tells the coming-of-age story of Kambili, a 15-year-old girl from a wealthy but troubled family.
        - Awards: Commonwealth Writers’ Prize for Best First Book (Africa) and overall Commonwealth Writers’ Prize nominee.
    - **Half of a Yellow Sun** (2006; film adaptation in 2013): This novel gained international acclaim for its portrayal of the Nigerian Civil War and its devastating impact.
    - **We Should All Be Feminists**: A powerful essay adapted from her TEDx talk, advocating for gender equality.
    - **[[The Danger of a Single Story]]**: discusses the impact of a single narrative on perceptions and how it leads to rise in [[stereotypes]]. 
- **Influences**:
	Adichie's original and initial inspiration came from [Chinua Achebe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinua_Achebe "Chinua Achebe"), after reading his 1958 novel _[Things Fall Apart](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Things_Fall_Apart "Things Fall Apart")_ at the age of 10; Adichie has said that she realized that people who looked like herself could "live in books"


Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s writing explores identity, [[feminism]], and the complexities of human experiences.

Commit message:

native narratives and postcolonial notes

content/Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie.md, after:

---
title: Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie
date: 2024-03-17
tags:
  - author
  - english
  - literature
---
Nigerian writer, novelist, poet, essayist, and playwright of postcolonial feminist literature

- **Bio**:
    - **Birth Date**: September 15, 1977
    - **Birthplace**: Enugu, Nigeria
    - **Background**: the fifth of six children, grew up in Nsukka, **Nigeria**. She was an avid reader from a young age and was profoundly influenced by[[ Chinua Achebe]]’s iconic novel, _[[Things Fall Apart]]_.
    - **Education**:
        - Studied medicine and pharmacy at the University of Nigeria.
        - Pursued communication and political science at Eastern Connecticut State University (B.A., 2001) in the United States.
        - Earned a master’s degree in creative writing from Johns Hopkins University.
        - Studied African history at Yale University.
- **Notable Works**:
    - **Purple Hibiscus** (2003): Her debut novel set in Nigeria, it tells the coming-of-age story of Kambili, a 15-year-old girl from a wealthy but troubled family.
        - Awards: Commonwealth Writers’ Prize for Best First Book (Africa) and overall Commonwealth Writers’ Prize nominee.
    - **Half of a Yellow Sun** (2006; film adaptation in 2013): This novel gained international acclaim for its portrayal of the Nigerian Civil War and its devastating impact.
    - **We Should All Be Feminists**: A powerful essay adapted from her TEDx talk, advocating for gender equality.
    - **[[The Danger of a Single Story]]**: discusses the impact of a single narrative on perceptions and how it leads to rise in [[stereotypes]]. 
- **Influences**:
	Adichie's original and initial inspiration came from [[Chinua Achebe]], after reading his 1958 novel _[Things Fall Apart](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Things_Fall_Apart "Things Fall Apart")_ at the age of 10; Adichie has said that she realized that people who looked like herself could "live in books"

Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s writing explores identity, [[feminism]], and the complexities of human experiences.
